# Abstract
This study investigates the relationship between the lead notification days when there is a planned service outage and customer satisfaction and service assurance within the telecommunications industry. This was measured by exploring the number of customer trouble tickets filed by impacted customers on the days of the outage. Planned outages are unavoidable as they play a role in improving current services and investing in the next generation innovations delivered by the network and it would be unreasonable for a customer to expect no impact on services. If a significant relationship was found, then the telecommunications company could better communicate outage notices and improve their relationship with the customer. This study was performed via the scientific method and leveraged existing data from a global telecommunications industry. It was an aggregated view of the last 27 months of planned outages (GCR’s) that had a customer impact with appended counts of correlated customer trouble tickets filed in the company customer relationship management system. Various statistical tests were applied to test hypotheses and base assumptions and measure the strength of the relationships in the data with the end goal of generating a linear regression algorithm to predict the optimal notification timeframe. The study found a weak correlation between the lead notification days and filed customer trouble tickets in the data set. Due to the weak correlation the model generated performed no better than random chance and further exploration is needed in this area. Recommendations for the continuing exploration include getting a more granular dataset as well as collecting qualitative data from surveys sent out to customers that have experienced an outage. 
Keywords: telecommunications, planned outage, customer satisfaction, service assurance, notification.

# Introduction
I am pursuing a quantitative research study in the Service Assurance business area of the telecommunications industry. More specifically, I am wanting to gain insight into how effective our outage notification lead times are by exploring the relationship between the planned outage windows (GCR) and the number of raised customer trouble tickets. Service assurance is defined as a set of procedures in place to improve customer experience and maximize customer satisfaction to increase the lifetime value of the customer, and customer satisfaction is the interaction, troubleshooting, and associated communication provided to a customer when a concern is raised. This research will provide a better understanding of the current customer relationship management processes associated with planned outages and will provide insight into potential changes in communication to improve customer satisfaction. A planned outage is internally referred to as a global change request (GCR), while an unplanned outage is referred to as an Event. During a GCR or Event window impacted customers can raise incident tickets in a customer relationship management application to get information and service resolution. If the CRM portal is not utilized, they can also call in to get directed to the appropriate channels to obtain outage information or ask questions to a representative.
The overall reputation and customer service process is critical to the success of a company in this industry since it is highly competitive. The telecommunication industry is constantly evolving with offers of higher bandwidth speeds, improved network capabilities, and service/ product feature enhancements. There is a constant competitor presence within both metropolitan and rural markets alike which results in a constant churn of customers leaving one company for another. Bad customer interactions and frequent service interruptions can cost a company return on investment expenses and future recurring revenue. Companies manage relationships based on service license agreements and various tracked key performance indicators (KPI’s) associated with the frequency, quality, and timeliness of communication with the customer whether due to an unexpected issue or upcoming planned outage. The need for planned outages is for the network maintenance teams to either repair or enhance the network. The network is the backbone for all services provided to the customer, it is a grouping of nodes and switches that pass signals and messages between a point of origin and a destination. The signals are transmitted through overlay networks enabled by laid fiber and pipelines which can get damaged by internal and external factors. Enhancements to the network are paramount to the continuing success of the company because they enhance customer satisfaction and innovations can attract new customers. These innovations can include faster network speeds, increased bandwidth, or new features that reflect the changing preferences or taste of the customer base. (Awuku, 2022) “note that to keep customers loyal to a particular innovation, the items must carry the "promise" that a good or service possesses the right features, qualities and characteristics which make it special or unique to satisfy his/ her need.” 

# Objectives
This research will be conducted in a quantitative approach where historical data from a telecommunications company will be analyzed for trends and patterns. The scientific method will be employed to test hypothesis and validate purposed theories generated from the creation of research questions and data exploration. As mentioned, my study is going to analyze the current effectiveness of the notification lead time communications sent to customers to alter them of an upcoming GCR. This purposed research question is practice oriented as it intends to improve current process for a specific company and results will not be generalizable. The findings of this study will directly influence the current process of sent notifications and will be utilized by network and customer facing employees. The results are context specific as they will only be applicable in instances where a GCR needs to occur, they will be dependent on the number of impacted customers, type of update, and how many potential windows are associated. 
The effectiveness will be measured by the number of associated customer trouble tickets entered by companies involved in the outage. Assumably, if the notification lead days was sent during an optimal window the impacted customers would not raise customer trouble tickets as they are properly informed and experiencing good customer service. This effective communication will also cultivate high trust in service assurance from the customer. Therefore, the lead time variable is one of the key dependent variables to be used in this study. It is reflective of the time interval between when notification was sent and the beginning of the GCR window. Under a GCR there are planned windows that reflect the date and hour interval that services will be impacted. Typically, the network maintenance teams plan multiple outage windows under the same GCR in case the work is not completed during the first window.  If a secondary window is utilized a new notification will be sent notifying the customers of the new timeframe. 

# Overview of Study
The purposed study will follow the scientific method and embrace a full quantitative approach. While it would be interesting to also incorporate survey feedback from the customers impacted by outages, access to this is not feasible at this time. The study will consume the historical data within the GCR Aggregate Details data set and create a simulation where the independent variable of associated customer trouble tickets will be predicted based off dependent variables associated with the GCR. To execute the purposed study, I will be using SQL Server, R, and Power BI to carry out the analytical tasks. The dataset that will be used for this study is sourced from a global telecommunication company’s corporate data warehouse (CDW). The title of the dataset is GCR Aggregated Details, and it is comprised of 69 variables. 53 of the variables are character attributes which can be used to describe or provide context to the data, 5 are date time variables which cover key dates within the GCR life cycle, 4 are binary variables that can be used to flag key concepts, and 7 are numeric variables that convey counts or quantifiable points of interest. It reflects aggregated historical GCR data combined with ticketing information from the customer relationship management (CRM) application.

# Research Questions and Hypothesis
The first component of my research question is to answer if there are differences in the lead times between GCR instances. This question has the Ho that there is no difference in mean lead notification days between GCR’s, while the Ha is that there means of the lead days are different. To test the hypothesis, I will generate summary statistics in SAS OnDemand for Academics to create a histogram and box and whisker plot to see the data dispersion. This will help me identify the outlier data and if there are any errors. I will make a declaration if the null hypothesis is accepted or rejected after running a one-way ANOVA test. 
The next component of my research question is to explore the associated customer trouble ticket totals. I will utilize the customer count bucket field that is available in the data to categorize the GCR data by size of impact and use the associated trouble ticket total to see if there are more filed during the larger GCR’s. The Ho for this question is that there is no difference in the mean customer trouble tickets associated with the 9 impact size categories, while the Ha is that there is a difference in the mean filed trouble tickets among the 9 impact size categories. I will again run base summary statistics in SAS OnDemand for Academics to gain quick context and create supporting histograms and box plots to visually explore the results. The accept or reject declaration will occur after I perform an ANOVA test that will compare the mean among the groups. I will also generate a correlation matrix between the customer trouble ticket totals and the customer size bucketing to see the relationship strength and rule out random chance. 
The next component of my research question will be to understand the customer interactions in GCR’s that needed to use multiple outage windows. This will help contextualize if the customers are more likely to submit a customer trouble ticket when services are interrupted multiple times. In addition to understanding the relationship with the multiple windows utilized and number of trouble tickets I also want to see if there are differences in the notification lead times. This component will have multiple hypothesis associated; the first Ho is that there is no difference in the mean number of customer trouble tickets submitted in GCR’s that used 1 window vs GCR’s that utilized multiple windows. The corresponding Ha is that there is a difference in mean customer trouble tickets submitted in GCR’s that used 1 window vs GCR’s that used multiple windows. As outlined in the previous components I will start by generating summary statistics in SAS OnDemand for Academics for both categories and visually represent the distinct groups in both histograms and box-plot objects. I will accept or reject the null hypothesis after running an ANOVA test. The second set of hypotheses generated for this component are Ho there is no difference in the mean notification lead days between GCR’s that used 1 window vs GCR’s that used multiple outage windows, while the Ha is that there are differences in the mean notification lead days between GCR’s that used 1 window vs GCR’s that used multiple windows. I will follow the same process in SAS OnDemand for Academics where I generate summary statistics, correlation matrix, and run ANOVA tests to conclude if the null hypothesis can be rejected. 
Once each component test is performed, I will generate a linear regression algorithm in SAS OnDemand for Academics to see if a reliable model can be generated that will explain the optimal lead day timing based on selected attributes. The model statistics and mean square error indicator will illustrate if there is a statistically significant relationship between lead notification days and the number of associated customer trouble tickets filled. If there is a significant returned p-value then I can conclude that the company can improve customer satisfaction by altering the current process and that the association between the CRM tickets and GCR is not by random chance.

# Literature Review
In 2022 results of a study were published that assessed customer perception of service innovation and loyalty from different innovation practices in the mobile telecommunication industry in Ghana (Awuku et all., 2022). The resulting findings were that companies need to invest financial and cognitive resources to develop innovations that address the convenience, efficiency, and timeliness of customer services. Cognitive investments should be made in consumer research and customer interaction. In a highly competitive industry and market it is of the upmost importance that companies continue to invest in innovations that improve and expand on current services purchased by customers. In the telecommunications space this can come from network maintenance tasks. Customer perception of how well a company is keeping pace and investing in growth has contributing factors to satisfaction and loyalty. Service innovation within the article is broken out into 3 categories, the first development of a new service/product, the second improvements related to modifications on existing platforms, the third a change in procedures utilized by the company. Larger modifications need to occur in a well-organized manner to reduce the risk, cost, and impact on the customer. Customer loyalty is centered around sustaining a long-term relationship with the customer. It encompasses the customer’s attitude to the use of services and how the company resolves any potential issues that arise. 
Another study that explored themes of customer satisfaction related to 3G/4G updates to telecommunication services in Pakistan was published in 2023 (Haq et all., 2023). The study relied on insights from 300 telecom administrators in the Punjab area. A related study found that customer satisfaction relates to quality, customer service, price, corporate image, and network coverage. The new advancements make the market highly competitive, and it is important to invest in the network to accommodate the rapid change. To grow the company telecommunication companies, need to secure brand protection by focusing on market share growth. Consumers expect that their services will be reliable, affordable, and will stay loyal to a company if the company addresses issues in an efficient manner. Network traffic is increasing putting pressure on spectrum efficiency, power, and haul/backhaul connection capacity.
In a study related to the need for continued maintenance and improvement of the networks, authors present the challenges associated with maintaining a large telecommunications system in terms of the constant changing needs of business (Silva et all., 2023). New innovations such as working toward 5th generation (5G) networks put pressure on companies to reduce operating costs while being agile to address changing preferences in the market. Existing network architecture is adapted to meet expanding needs and product features that were not apar of the original intention or design. Altering these systems is costly since there is overhead involved in updating and maintaining the system. Issues associated with reuse of the legacy system are related to interoperability, development lifecycle, and development orchestration. Interoperability is the term used to describe a network comprised of a mix of legacy and modern systems and the potential lack of expertise or gap in knowledge in the workforce. Issues associated with the development lifecycle are defined as efficiency lost due to characteristics of reused subsystem architecture, need to look at the update impact on the entire system and perform updates in iterative steps. Issues related to deployment orchestration are defined as installation, and scaling issues related to updating the system. 
A final review explored the role of customer relationship management applications on customer satisfaction in the Jordan telecommunications market (Al-Weshaha et all., 2019). CRM benefits are access to information, service quality process improvement, and effective allocation of tasks and monitoring systems. CRM focuses on developing long-term supportive relationships with customers while lowering costs and increasing productivity. The system systematically compiles all customer historical information to better inform customer support staff when issues arise. When successfully implemented the CRM system should be easy to use by internal and external assets, properly integrated with data assets and credible valid results show when in use and should have a positive impact on time and tasks of service support staff. This is related to my study due to the need to have an application that allows easy communication lines with the customer. All tickets filed have related workflows assigned with expectations of timely resolution. 

#Limitations
Currently the purposed dataset is at an aggregated level where there is 1 GCR ID per row and all customer attributes are reflected in counts. In the future it could be interesting to dig into specific customers to see if there are any customers that input a customer trouble ticket during every planned and notified GCR. Another limitation of the data is that there are only 27 months of history reflected. This data range is enough to explore recent patterns and trends but there is no ability to investigate customer trouble associations over a long period. There is also no way of knowing if there were changes to the notification process that occurred during this period since there is no interaction or input from subject matter experts within the company. Context provided by the customer experience team would maximize insights and decision-making abilities. This study would also benefit from context provided by impacted customers, it would be interesting to connect sentiment and experience into the GCR process. 

# Ethical Considerations
Since this data is sourced from my current employer, I will need to take care to conceal the identity of both the company itself and the companies of the customers. I will not be reporting any controlled unclassified information (CUI) and will not be diving into regionality as location data have been eliminated. There are no notes fields that contain confidential information and recent data has been excluded. My management chain has been made aware of my intent to use this data in the purposed study and I have obtained the necessary approval. An additional ethical consideration was put in place to ensure that I am only gaining access to this data while connected to the company network. Due to this consideration, I will be performing analysis in SAS OnDemand for Academics instead of utilizing R.

# Findings


# Conslusion
The GCR Aggregate Details dataset was used to perform exploratory and analytical tasks associated with my research proposal. The purpose of the analysis was to highlight the opportunity to improve customer perceived service assurance and satisfaction by determining the optimal lead notification time of a planned outage. This optimal interval was measured by changes in the correlated customer trouble tickets filed when a planned outage window occurs. While performing analysis I became aware of data quality issues such a negative value and a high volume of 0 value associated customer trouble and notification lead day variables. I believe these factors contributed to the poor performance of my linear regression model as it skewed the relationships by having a high volume of outlier data. I was unable to generate a model that would predict the optimal notification lead days for a GCR. An optimal model would have been able to predict the associated customer trouble tickets when I input different values for the lead days. During analysis I was able to pinpoint that there seems to be no difference in process depending on the size of the customer impact. This is something that I can take back to the teams to confirm and explore further to see if it would be beneficial to have separate workflows depending on the customer impact totals. 
In the future I recommend expanding on this initial research as more significant results could be generated by using a more granular data set. The added details would enable the researcher to explore GCR behavior by region, or by specific customer. I would also recommend more cleansing activities by working with subject matter experts to have improved accuracy. This partnership could also lead to appending call center volumes, and customer survey data. 

# Recomendations
I recommend expanding the data collection and preparation phases of the research to meet the original intent of the study. This includes looking at the most granular level of data instead of the aggregated view as well as meeting with subject matter experts to better cleanse and validate the data. There were noted instances where the lead days value was negative, which would indicate that the customer was notified after the impact occurred. There was also a high number of outlier data and null values. These need to be properly researched and qualified before a meaningful predictive algorithm can be generated. I also recommend further researching the insights noted in the hypothesis testing phase of the project. It is interesting that the mean values for lead days were similar across the customer impact buckets and GCR designations. The company could benefit from having a unique strategy across the different occurrences. 

